A Few 

Selections of 

Favorite 
Poems 

(in English, 

mostly) 

Featuring (in order): 

 
 

 

Willie S. 
Blake 
Walt 
Twain 
Banjo 
Frost 
Kahlil 
Gwen 

Langston 
Jacques 

Jack 

Lawrence 

Allen 

R. Hayden 
M. Harper 

Shel 
& 

Maya 

 

SONNET XVIII 
  by William Shakespeare 
 
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? 
Thou art more lovely and more temperate: 
Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, 
And summer's lease hath all too short a date: 
Sometime too hot the eye of heaven shines, 
And often is his gold complexion dimmed, 
And every fair from fair sometime declines, 
By chance, or nature's changing course untrimmed: 
But thy eternal summer shall not fade, 
Nor lose possession of that fair thou ow'st, 
Nor shall death brag thou wander'st in his shade, 
When in eternal lines to time thou grow'st, 
So long as men can breathe, or eyes can see, 
So long lives this, and this gives life to thee. 
 
  
 
SONNET LXV 
  by Willam Shakespeare 
 
Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor boundless sea, 
But sad mortality o'ersways their power, 
How with this rage shall beauty hold a plea, 
Whose action is no stronger than a flower? 
O! how shall summer's honey breath hold out, 
Against the wrackful siege of battering days, 
When rocks impregnable are not so stout, 
Nor gates of steel so strong but Time decays? 
O fearful meditation! where, alack, 
Shall Time's best jewel from Time's chest lie hid? 
Or what strong hand can hold his swift foot back? 
Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid? 
O! none, unless this miracle have might, 
That in black ink my love may still shine bright.  
 
 
 
SONNET CXVI 
  by Willam Shakespeare 
 
Let me not to the marriage of true minds 
Admit impediments. Love is not love 
Which alters when it alteration finds, 
Or bends with the remover to remove: 
O, no! it is an ever-fixed mark, 
That looks on tempests and is never shaken; 
It is the star to every wandering bark, 
Whose worth's unknown, although his height be taken. 
Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks 
Within his bending sickle's compass come; 
Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks, 
But bears it out even to the edge of doom. 
If this be error and upon me proved, 
I never writ, nor no man ever loved. 

"Auguries of Innocence" 
  by William Blake   
 
To see a World in a Grain of Sand 
And a Heaven in a Wild Flower, 
Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand 
And Eternity in an hour. 
  
A Robin Red breast in a Cage 
Puts all Heaven in a Rage. 
A dove house fill'd with doves & Pigeons 
Shudders Hell thro' all its regions. 
A dog starv'd at his Master's Gate 
Predicts the ruin of the State. 
A Horse misus'd upon the Road 
Calls to Heaven for Human blood. 
Each outcry of the hunted Hare 
A fibre from the Brain does tear. 
A Skylark wounded in the wing, 
A Cherubim does cease to sing. 
The Game Cock clipp'd and arm'd for fight 
Does the Rising Sun affright. 
Every Wolf's & Lion's howl 
Raises from Hell a Human Soul. 
The wild deer, wand'ring here & there, 
Keeps the Human Soul from Care. 
The Lamb misus'd breeds public strife 
And yet forgives the Butcher's Knife. 
The Bat that flits at close of Eve 
Has left the Brain that won't believe. 
The Owl that calls upon the Night 
Speaks the Unbeliever's fright. 
He who shall hurt the little Wren 
Shall never be belov'd by Men. 
He who the Ox to wrath has mov'd 
Shall never be by Woman lov'd. 
The wanton Boy that kills the Fly 
Shall feel the Spider's enmity. 
He who torments the Chafer's sprite 
Weaves a Bower in endless Night. 
The Catterpillar on the Leaf 
Repeats to thee thy Mother's grief. 
Kill not the Moth nor Butterfly, 
For the Last Judgement draweth nigh. 
He who shall train the Horse to War 
Shall never pass the Polar Bar. 
The Beggar's Dog & Widow's Cat, 
Feed them & thou wilt grow fat. 
 

The Gnat that sings his Summer's song 
Poison gets from Slander's tongue. 
The poison of the Snake & Newt 
Is the sweat of Envy's Foot. 
The poison of the Honey Bee 
Is the Artist's Jealousy. 
The Prince's Robes & Beggars' Rags 
Are Toadstools on the Miser's Bags. 
A truth that's told with bad intent 
Beats all the Lies you can invent. 
It is right it should be so; 
Man was made for Joy & Woe; 
And when this we rightly know 
Thro' the World we safely go. 
Joy & Woe are woven fine, 
A Clothing for the Soul divine; 
Under every grief & pine 
Runs a joy with silken twine. 
The Babe is more than swadling Bands; 
Throughout all these Human Lands 
Tools were made, & born were hands, 
Every Farmer Understands. 
Every Tear from Every Eye 
Becomes a Babe in Eternity. 
This is caught by Females bright 
And return'd to its own delight. 
The Bleat, the Bark, Bellow & Roar 
Are Waves that Beat on Heaven's Shore. 
The Babe that weeps the Rod beneath 
Writes Revenge in realms of death. 
The Beggar's Rags, fluttering in Air, 
Does to Rags the Heavens tear. 
The Soldier arm'd with Sword & Gun, 
Palsied strikes the Summer's Sun. 
The poor Man's Farthing is worth more 
Than all the Gold on Afric's Shore. 
One Mite wrung from the Labrer's hands 
Shall buy & sell the Miser's lands: 
Or, if protected from on high, 
Does that whole Nation sell & buy. 
He who mocks the Infant's Faith 
Shall be mock'd in Age & Death. 
He who shall teach the Child to Doubt 
The rotting Grave shall ne'er get out. 
He who respects the Infant's faith 
Triumph's over Hell & Death. 
The Child's Toys & the Old Man's Reasons 
Are the Fruits of the Two seasons. 
 

The Questioner, who sits so sly, 
Shall never know how to Reply. 
He who replies to words of Doubt 
Doth put the Light of Knowledge out. 
The Strongest Poison ever known 
Came from Caesar's Laurel Crown. 
Nought can deform the Human Race 
Like the Armour's iron brace. 
When Gold & Gems adorn the Plow 
To peaceful Arts shall Envy Bow. 
A Riddle or the Cricket's Cry 
Is to Doubt a fit Reply. 
The Emmet's Inch & Eagle's Mile 
Make Lame Philosophy to smile. 
He who Doubts from what he sees 
Will ne'er believe, do what you Please. 
If the Sun & Moon should doubt 
They'd immediately Go out. 
To be in a Passion you Good may do, 
But no Good if a Passion is in you. 
The Whore & Gambler, by the State 
Licenc'd, build that Nation's Fate. 
The Harlot's cry from Street to Street 
Shall weave Old England's winding Sheet. 
The Winner's Shout, the Loser's Curse, 
Dance before dead England's Hearse. 
Every Night & every Morn 
Some to Misery are Born. 
Every Morn & every Night 
Some are Born to sweet Delight. 
Some ar Born to sweet Delight, 
Some are born to Endless Night. 
We are led to Believe a Lie 
When we see not Thro' the Eye 
Which was Born in a Night to Perish in a Night 
When the Soul Slept in Beams of Light. 
God Appears & God is Light 
To those poor Souls who dwell in the Night, 
But does a Human Form Display 
To those who Dwell in Realms of day. 

The_Marriage_of_Heaven_and_Hell 
  by William Blake 
 
PLATE 14 
 
  The ancient tradition that the world will be consumed in fire at the 
end of six thousand years is true. as I have heard from Hell. 
  For the cherub with his flaming sword is hereby commanded to 
leave his guard at the tree of life, and when he does, the whole crea- 
tion will be consumed, and appear infinite. and holy whereas it now 
appears finite & corrupt. 
  This will come to pass by an improvement of sensual enjoyment. 
  But first the notion that man has a body distinct from his soul, is to  
be expunged; this I shall do, by printing in the infernal method, by  
corrosives, which in Hell are salutary and medicinal, melting apparent  
surfaces away, and displaying the infinite which was hid. 
  If the doors of perception were cleansed every thing would appear  
to man as it is: infinite. 
  For man has closed himself up, till he sees all things thro' narrow  
chinks of his cavern. 
 
----- 
 
PLATE 15 
                         A Memorable Fancy 
 
  I was in a Printing house in Hell & saw the method in which 
knowledge is transmitted from generation to generation. 
  In the first chamber was a Dragon-Man, clearing away the rubbish 
from a caves mouth; within, a number of Dragons were hollowing the 
cave, 
  In the second chamber was a Viper folding round the rock & the 
cave, and others adorning it with gold silver and precious stones. 
  In the third chamber was an Eagle with wings and feathers of air, 
he caused the inside of the cave to be infinite, around were numbers 
of Eagle like men, who built palaces in the immense cliffs. 
  In the fourth chamber were Lions of flaming fire raging around &  
melting the metals into living fluids. 
  In the fifth chamber were Unnam'd forms, which cast the metals 
into the expanse. 
  There they were reciev'd by Men who occupied the sixth chamber, 
and took the forms of books & were arranged in libraries. 
 

  
When I Heard the Learn’d Astronomer 
 
         by Walt Whitman 
 
 
When I heard the learn'd astronomer,  
 
When the proofs, the figures, were ranged in columns before me,  
 
When I was shown the charts and diagrams, to add, divide,  
 
   and measure them, 
 
When I sitting heard the astronomer where he lectured with 
 
   much applause in the lecture-room, 
 
How soon unaccountable I became tired and sick, 
 
Till rising and gliding out I wander'd off by myself, 
 
In the mystical moist night-air, and from time to time,  
 
Look'd up in perfect silence at the stars. 
 
 

* 

 

* 

 

* 

 
 
O Captain! My Captain! 
 
by Walt Whitman 
 
O Captain! my Captain! our fearful trip is done, The ship has weather'd every rack, 
      the prize we sought is won, The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting, 
      While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring; But O heart! heart! heart! 
      O the bleeding drops of red, Where on the deck my Captain lies, Fallen cold and dead. 
      O Captain! my Captain! rise up and hear the bells; Rise up- for you the flag is flung- for 
      you the bugle trills,  
                                   
         For you bouquets and ribbon'd wreaths- for you the shores 
             a-crowding, 
          For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning; 
             Here Captain! dear father! 
               This arm beneath your head! 
                 It is some dream that on the deck, 
                   You've fallen cold and dead. 
 
          My Captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still, 
          My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will, 
          The ship is anchor'd safe and sound, its voyage closed and done, 
          From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with object won; 
               Exult O shores, and ring O bells! 
                 But I with mournful tread, 
                   Walk the deck my Captain lies, 
                     Fallen cold and dead. 

The_War_Prayer 
   by Mark Twain 
 
    It was a time of great and exalting excitement. The country was up in arms, the war was on, in 
every breast burned the holy fire of patriotism; the drums were beating, the bands playing, the toy 
pistols popping, the bunched firecrackers hissing and sputtering; on every hand and far down the 
receding and fading spreads of roofs and balconies a fluttering wilderness of flags flashed in the 
sun; daily the young volunteers marched down the wide avenue gay and fine in their new 
uniforms, the proud fathers and mothers and sisters and sweethearts cheering them with voices 
choked with happy emotion as they swung by; nightly the packed mass meetings listened, 
panting, to patriot oratory which stirred the deepest deeps of their hearts and which they 
interrupted at briefest intervals with cyclones of applause, the tears running down their cheeks the 
while; in the churches the pastors preached devotion to flag and country and invoked the God of 
Battles, beseeching His aid in our good cause in outpouring of fervid eloquence which moved 
every listener. 
    It was indeed a glad and gracious time, and the half dozen rash spirits that ventured to 
disapprove of the war and cast a doubt upon its righteousness straightway got such a stern and 
angry warning that for their personal safety's sake they quickly shrank out of sight and offended 
no more in that way. 
    Sunday morning came - next day the battalions would leave for the front; the church was filled; 
the volunteers were there, their faces alight with material dreams - visions of a stern advance, the 
gathering momentum, the rushing charge, the flashing sabers, the flight of the foe, the tumult, the 
enveloping smoke, the fierce pursuit, the surrender! - then home from the war, bronzed heros, 
welcomed, adored, submerged in golden seas of glory! With the volunteers sat their dear ones, 
proud, happy, and envied by the neighbors and friends who had no sons and brothers to send forth 
to the field of honor, there to win for the flag or, failing, die the noblest of noble deaths. The 
service proceeded; a war chapter from the Old Testament was read; the first prayer was said; it 
was followed by an organ burst that shook the building, and with one impulse the house rose, 
with glowing eyes and beating hearts, and poured out that tremendous invocation -- "God the all-
terrible! Thou who ordainest, Thunder thy clarion and lightning thy sword!" 
    Then came the "long" prayer. None could remember the like of it for passionate pleading and 
moving and beautiful language. The burden of its supplication was that an ever-merciful and 
benignant Father of us all would watch over our noble young soldiers and aid, comfort, and 
encourage them in their patriotic work; bless them, shield them in His mighty hand, make them 
strong and confident, invincible in the bloody onset; help them to crush the foe, grant to them and 
to their flag and country imperishable honor and glory  --  
    An aged stranger entered and moved with slow and noiseless step up the main aisle, his eyes 
fixed upon the minister, his long body clothed in a robe that reached to his feet, his head bare, his 
white hair descending in a frothy cataract to his shoulders, his seamy face unnaturally pale, pale 
even to ghastliness. With all eyes following him and wondering, he made his silent way; without 
pausing, he ascended to the preacher's side and stood there, waiting. 
    With shut lids the preacher, unconscious of his presence, continued his moving prayer, and at 
last finished it with the words, uttered in fervent appeal,"Bless our arms, grant us the victory, O 
Lord our God, Father and Protector of our land and flag!" 
    The stranger touched his arm, motioned him to step aside - which the startled minister did - and 
took his place. During some moments he surveyed the spellbound audience with solemn eyes in 
which burned an uncanny light; then in a deep voice he said 
    "I come from the Throne - bearing a message from Almighty God!" The words smote the 
house with a shock; if the stranger perceived it he gave no attention. "He has heard the prayer of 
His servant your shepherd and grant it if such shall be your desire after I, His messenger, shall 
have explained to you its import - that is to say, its full import. For it is like unto many of the 
prayers of men, in that it asks for more than he who utters it is aware of - except he pause and 
think. 
    "God's servant and yours has prayed his prayer. Has he paused and taken thought? Is it one 
prayer? No, it is two -  one uttered, the other not. Both have reached the ear of His Who heareth 
all supplications, the spoken and the unspoken. Ponder this - keep it in mind. If you beseech a 

blessing upon yourself, beware! lest without intent you invoke a curse upon a neighbor at the 
same time. If you pray for the blessing of rain upon your crop which needs it, by that act you are 
possibly praying for a curse upon some neighbor's crop which may not need rain and can be 
injured by it. 
    "You have heard your servant's prayer - the uttered part of it. I am commissioned by God to put 
into words the other part of it - that part which the pastor, and also you in your hearts, fervently 
prayed silently. And ignorantly and unthinkingly? God grant that it was so! You heard these 
words: 'Grant us the victory, O Lord our God!' That is sufficient. The whole of the uttered prayer 
is compact into those pregnant words. Elaborations were not necessary. When you have prayed 
for victory you have prayed for many unmentioned results which follow victory - must follow it, 
cannot help but follow it. Upon the listening spirit of God the Father fell also the unspoken part of 
the prayer. He commandeth me to put it into words. 
Listen! 
    "O Lord our Father, our young patriots, idols of our hearts, go forth to battle –  
be Thou near them!  With them, in spirit, we also go forth from the sweet peace of our beloved 
firesides to smite the foe.  O Lord our God,  
help us to tear their soldiers to bloody shreds with our shells;  
help us to cover their smiling fields with the pale forms of their patriot dead;  
help us to drown the thunder of the guns with the shrieks of their wounded, writhing in pain;  
help us to lay waste their humble homes with a hurricane of fire;  
help us to wring the hearts of their unoffending widows with unavailing grief;  
help us to turn them out roofless with their little children to wander unfriended the wastes of their 
desolated land in rags and hunger and thirst, sports of the sun flames of summer and the icy winds 
of winter, broken in spirit, worn with travail, imploring Thee for the refuge of the grave and 
denied it -  
for our sakes who adore Thee, Lord,  
blast their hopes,  
blight their lives,  
protract their bitter pilgrimage,  
make heavy their steps,  
water their way with their tears,  
stain the white snow with the blood of their wounded feet!  
We ask it, in the spirit of love, of Him Who is the Source of Love, and Who is ever - faithful 
refuge and friend of all that are sore beset and seek His aid with humble and contrite hearts.  
Amen."  
 
(After a pause) 
 
"Ye have prayed it; if ye still desire it, speak! The messenger of the Most High waits." 
 
It was believed afterward that the man was a lunatic, because there was no sense in what he said. 

Clancy of the Overflow 
   by A. B. "Banjo" Patterson 
 
I had written him a letter which I had, for want of better 
Knowledge, sent to where I met him down the Lachlan, years ago, 
He was shearing when I knew him, so I sent the letter to him, 
Just on spec, addressed as follows, "Clancy, of The Overflow" 
 
And an answer came directed in a writing unexpected, 
(And I think the same was written with a thumb-nail dipped in tar) 
Twas his shearing mate who wrote it, and verbatim I will quote it: 
"Clancy's gone to Queensland droving, and we don't know where he are." 
 
* * * * * * * * * 
 
In my wild erratic fancy visions come to me of Clancy 
Gone a-droving "down the Cooper" where the Western drovers go; 
As the stock are slowly stringing, Clancy rides behind them singing, 
For the drover's life has pleasures that the townsfolk never know. 
 
And the bush hath friends to meet him, and their kindly voices greet him 
In the murmur of the breezes and the river on its bars, 
And he sees the vision splendid of the sunlit plains extended, 
And at night the wond'rous glory of the everlasting stars. 
 
* * * * * * * * * 
 
I am sitting in my dingy little office, where a stingy 
Ray of sunlight struggles feebly down between the houses tall, 
And the foetid air and gritty of the dusty, dirty city 
Through the open window floating, spreads its foulness over all 
 
And in place of lowing cattle, I can hear the fiendish rattle 
Of the tramways and the buses making hurry down the street, 
And the language uninviting of the gutter children fighting, 
Comes fitfully and faintly through the ceaseless tramp of feet. 
 
And the hurrying people daunt me, and their pallid faces haunt me 
As they shoulder one another in their rush and nervous haste, 
With their eager eyes and greedy, and their stunted forms and weedy, 
For townsfolk have no time to grow, they have no time to waste. 
 
And I somehow rather fancy that I'd like to change with Clancy, 
Like to take a turn at droving where the seasons come and go, 
While he faced the round eternal of the cash-book and the journal -- 
But I doubt he'd suit the office, Clancy, of The Overflow. 
 

Song of the Artesian Water 
   by A. B. "Banjo" Paterson 
 
Now the stock have started dying, for the Lord has sent a drought; 
But we're sick of prayers and Providence -- we're going to do without; 
With the derricks up above us and the solid earth below, 
We are waiting at the lever for the word to let her go. 
Sinking down, deeper down, 
Oh, we'll sink it deeper down: 
As the drill is plugging downward at a thousand feet of level, 
If the Lord won't send us water, oh, we'll get it from the devil; 
Yes, we'll get it from the devil deeper down. 
 
Now, our engine's built in Glasgow by a very canny Scot, 
And he marked it twenty horse-power, but he don't know what is what: 
When Canadian Bill is firing with the sun-dried gidgee logs, 
She can equal thirty horses and a score or so of dogs. 
Sinking down, deeper down, 
Oh, we're going deeper down: 
If we fail to get the water, then it's ruin to the squatter, 
For the drought is on the station and the weather's growing hotter, 
But we're bound to get the water deeper down. 
 
But the shaft has started caving and the sinking's very slow, 
And the yellow rods are bending in the water down below, 
And the tubes are always jamming, and they can't be made to shift 
Till we nearly burst the engine with a forty horse-power lift. 
Sinking down, deeper down, 
Oh, we're going deeper down: 
Though the shaft is always caving, and the tubes are always jamming, 
Yet we'll fight our way to water while the stubborn drill is ramming -- 
While the stubborn drill is ramming deeper down. 
 
But there's no artesian water, though we've passed three thousand feet, 
And the contract price is growing, and the boss is nearly beat. 
But it must be down beneath us, and it's down we've got to go, 
Though she's bumping on the solid rock four thousand feet below. 
Sinking down, deeper down, 
Oh, we're going deeper down: 
And it's time they heard us knocking on the roof of Satan's dwellin'; 
But we'll get artesian water if we cave the roof of hell in -- 
Oh! we'll get artesian water deeper down. 
 
But it's hark! the whistle's blowing with a wild, exultant blast, 
And the boys are madly cheering, for they've struck the flow at last; 
And it's rushing up the tubing from four thousand feet below, 
Till it spouts above the casing in a million-gallon flow. 
And it's down, deeper down -- 
Oh, it comes from deeper down; 
It is flowing, ever flowing, in a free, unstinted measure 
From the silent hidden places where the old earth hides her treasure -- 
Where the old earth hides her treasures deeper down. 
 
And it's clear away the timber, and it's let the water run: 
How it glimmers in the shadow, how it flashes in the sun! 
By the silent bells of timber, by the miles of blazing plain 
It is bringing hope and comfort to the thirsty land again. 
Flowing down, further down; 
It is flowing deeper down 
To the tortured thirsty cattle, bringing gladness in its going; 
Through the droughty days of summer it is flowing, ever flowing -- 
It is flowing, ever flowing, further down. 

"Stopping By Woods On A Snowy Evening" 
    by Robert Frost 
 
Whose woods these are I think I know. 
His house is in the village though; 
He will not see me stopping here 
To watch his woods fill up with snow. 
 
My little horse must think it queer 
To stop without a farmhouse near 
Between the woods and frozen lake 
The darkest evening of the year. 
 
He gives his harness bells a shake 
To ask if there is some mistake. 
The only other sound's the sweep 
Of easy wind and downy flake. 
 
The woods are lovely, dark and deep. 
But I have promises to keep, 
And miles to go before I sleep, 
And miles to go before I sleep. 
 
 
 
 
"Fire and Ice" 
    by Robert Frost 
 
Some say the world will end in fire, 
Some say in ice. 
From what I've tasted of desire 
I hold with those who favour fire. 
But if it had to perish twice, 
I think I know enough of hate 
To say that for destruction ice 
Is also great 
And would suffice. 

 
Humans are divided  
into different clans and tribes, 
and belong to countries and towns.  
 
But I find myself a stranger 
to all communites 
and belong to no settlement. 
 
The universe is my country 
and the human family 
is my tribe. 
 
 
-- from _A_Tear_&_A_Smile_ 
               by Kahlil Gibran 

 
 
We Real Cool 
  by Gwendolyn Brooks 
 
The Pool Players 
Seven at the Golden Shovel 
 
We real cool. We 
Left School. We 
 
Lurk late. We 
Strike straight. We 
 
Sing sin. We 
Thin gin. We 
 
Jazz June. We 
Die soon. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Bean Eaters  
  by Gwendolyn Brooks 
 
They eat beans mostly, this old yellow pair, 
Dinner is a casual affair. 
Plain chipware on a plain and creaking wood, 
Tin flatware. 
 
Two who are Mostly Good. 
Two who have lived their day, 
But keep on putting on their clothes 
And putting things away. 
 
And remembering... 
Remembering, with twinklings and twinges, 
As they lean over the beans in their rented back room 
that is full of beads and receipts and dolls and 
cloths, tobacco crumbs, vases and fringes. 
 
 

The Negro Speaks of Rivers  
   by Langston Hughes  
 
 
I've known rivers: 
I've known rivers ancient as the world and older than the 
     flow of human blood in human veins. 
 
My soul has grown deep like the rivers. 
 
I bathed in the Euphrates when dawns were young. 
I built my hut near the Congo and it lulled me to sleep. 
I looked upon the Nile and raised the pyramids above it. 
I heard the singing of the Mississippi when Abe Lincoln  
     went down to New Orleans, and I've seen its muddy  
     bosom turn all golden in the sunset. 
 
I've known rivers: 
Ancient, dusky rivers. 
 
My soul has grown deep like the rivers. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Dream Deferred 
   by Langston Hughes 
 
What happens to a dream deferred? 
Does it dry up 
Like a raisin in the sun? 
Or fester like a sore-- 
And then run? 
Does it stink like rotten meat? 
Or crust and sugar over-- 
like a syrupy sweet? 
Maybe it just sags 
like a heavy load. 
Or does it explode? 
 
 

Les Feuilles Mortes 
   by Jacques Prévert 
   English lyrics by Johnny Mercer 
 
Oh! je voudrais tant que tu te souviennes 
Des jours heureux où nous étions amis  
En ce temps-là la vie était plus belle, 
Et le soleil plus brûlant qu'aujourd'hui 
Les feuilles mortes se ramassent à la pelle 
Tu vois, je n'ai pas oublié 
Les feuilles mortes se ramassent à la pelle, 
Les souvenirs et les regrets aussi 
Et le vent du nord les emporte 
Dans la nuit froide de l'oubli. 
Tu vois, je n'ai pas oublié 
La chanson que tu me chantais.  
 
C'est une chanson qui nous ressemble 
Toi, tu m'aimais et je t'aimais  
Et nous vivions tous deux ensemble 
Toi qui m'aimais, moi qui t'aimais  
Mais la vie sépare ceux qui s'aiment 
Tout doucement, sans faire de bruit 
Et la mer efface sur le sable 
Les pas des amants désunis. 
 
Les feuilles mortes se ramassent à la pelle, 
Les souvenirs et les regrets aussi 
Mais mon amour silencieux et fidèle 
Sourit toujours et remercie la vie 
Je t'aimais tant, tu étais si jolie, 
Comment veux-tu que je t'oublie? 
En ce temps-là, la vie était plus belle 
Et le soleil plus brûlant qu'aujourd'hui 
Tu étais ma plus douce amie 
Mais je n'ai que faire des regrets 
Et la chanson que tu chantais  
Toujours, toujours je l'entendrai! 
 
 
 
------------------------------------------- 
 
 
The falling leaves drift by the window 
The autumn leaves of red and gold 
I see your lips, the summer kisses 
The sun-burned hands I used to hold 
Since you went away the days grow long 
And soon I'll hear old winter's song 
But I miss you most of all, my darling 
When autumn leaves start to fall 
 
Since you went away the days grow long 
And soon I'll hear old winter's song 
But I miss you most of all, my darling 
When autumn leaves start to fall 
 
 

"Familiale" 
   by Jacques Prévert 
 
La mère fait du tricot 
Le fils fait la guerre 
Elle trouve ça tout naturel la mère 
Et le père qu'est-ce qu'il fait le père? 
Il fait des affaires 
Sa femme fait du tricote 
Son fils la guerre 
Lui des affaires 
Il trouve ça tout naturel le père 
Et le fils et le fils  
Qu'est-ce qu'il trouve le fils? 
Il ne trouve rien absolument rien le fils 
Le fils sa mère fait du tricot son père des affaires lui la guerre 
Quand il aura fini la guerre 
Il fera des affaires avec son père 
La guerre continue la mère continue elle tricote 
Le père continue il fait des affaires 
Le fils est tué il ne continue plus 
Le père et la mère vont au cimetière 
Ils trouvent ça tout naturel le père et la mère 
La vie continue la vie avec le tricot la guerre les affaires 
Les affaires les affaires et les affaires 
La vie avec le cimetière 
 
----------------------------------------------- 
 
“Family Life” 
 
The mother knits 
The son makes war 
She finds this completely natural the mother 
And the father what does he do the father? 
He does business 
His wife knits 
His son makes war 
Him the business 
He finds this completely natural the father 
And the son and the son 
What does he find the son? 
He finds nothing absolutely nothing the son 
The son his mother knits his father does business him war 
When he has finished with the war 
He will do business with his father 
The war continues the mother continues she knits 
The father continues he does business 
The son is killed he continues no longer 
The father and the mother go to the cemetery 
They find this completely natural the father and the mother 
Life goes on life with the knitting the war the business 
The business the war the knitting the war 
The business the business and the business 
Life with the cemetery 
 
   -- trans. by J.Tharsen 

"Déjeuner du Matin" 
      by Jacques Prévert 
 
Il a mis le café 
Dans la tasse 
Il a mis le lait 
Dans la tasse de café 
Il a mis le sucre 
Dans le café au lait 
Avec la petite cuiller 
Il a tourné 
Il a bu le café au lait 
Et il a reposé la tasse 
Sans me parler 
Il a allumé 
Une cigarette 
Il a fait des ronds 
Avec la fumée 
Il a mis les cendres 
Dans le cendrier 
Sans me parler 
Sans me regarder 
Il s'est lèvé 
Il a mis 
Son chapeau sur sa tête 
Il a mis 
Son manteau de pluie 
Parce qu'il pleuvait 
Et il est parti 
Sous la pluie 
Sans une parole 
Et moi j'ai pris  
Ma tête dans ma main 
Et j'ai pleuré. 
 
 

 
“Breakfast” 
 
He put the coffee 
In the cup 
He put the milk 
in the cup of coffee 
He put the sugar 
In the café au lait 
With the teaspoon 
He stirred 
He drank the café au lait 
And he replaced the cup 
Without speaking to me 
He lit 
A cigarette 
He made rings 
With the smoke 
He put the ashes 
In the ashtray 
Without speaking to me 
Without looking at me 
He got up 
He put 
His hat on his head 
He put on 
His raincoat 
Because it was raining 
And he left 
In the rain 
Without a word 
And me I took 
My head in my hands 
And I cried. 
 
  -- trans. by J.Tharsen 

“Charlie Parker” 
   by Jack Kerouac 
 
Charlie Parker looked like Buddha  
Charlie Parker, who recently died  
Laughing at a juggler on the TV  
After weeks of strain and sickness,  
Was called the Perfect Musician.  
And his expression on his face  
Was as calm, beautiful, and profound  
As the image of the Buddha  
Represented in the East, the lidded eyes  
The expression that says "All Is Well"  
This was what Charlie Parker  
Said when he played, All is Well.  
You had the feeling of early-in-the-morning  
Like a hermit's joy, or  
Like the perfect cry of some wild gang  
At a jam session,  
"Wail, Wop"  
Charlie burst his lungs to reach the speed  
Of what the speedsters wanted  
And what they wanted  
Was his eternal Slowdown.  

 

               Coney Island of the Mind #5 
                      by Lawrence Ferlinghetti                  
 
                     Sometime during eternity 
                                          some guys show up 
           and one of them 
                          who shows up real late 
                                              is a kind of carpenter 
               from some square-type place 
                                                       like Galilee 
                and he starts wailing 
                                          and claiming he is hep 
                 to who made heaven 
                                                and earth 
                                                         and that the cat 
                                who really laid it on us 
                                                          is his Dad 
 
                  And moreover 
                       he adds 
                                  Its all writ down 
                                               on some scroll-type parchments 
                  which some henchmen 
                        leave lying around the Dead Sea somewheres 
                    a long time ago 
                              and which you won't even find 
                 for a coupla thousand years or so 
                                                                or at least for 
                    nineteen hundred and fortyseven  
                                                                   of them 
                                                    to be exact 
                                                                    and even then 
                   nobody really believes them 
                                                    or me 
                                                        for that matter 
 
                  You're hot  
                               they tell him 
                  And they cool him 
 
                  They stretch him on the Tree to cool 
 
                   And everybody after that 
                                                    is always making models 
                                          of this Tree 
                                                       with Him hung up 
                   and always crooning His name 
                                                   and calling him to come down 
                                       and sit in         
                                                  on their combo 
                                as if he is THE king cat 
                                                    whos got to blow 
                         or they can't quite make it 
                      Only he don't come down 
                                                        from His tree 
                       Him just hang there 
                                                on His Tree 
                                                     looking real Petered out 
                                      and real cool 
                                                     and also 
                                  according to a round-up 
                                                            of late world news 
                           from the usual unreliable sources 
                                                                       real dead 

  A Supermarket in California 
     by Allen Ginsburg  
 
  What thoughts I have of you tonight, Walt Whitman, for I 
walked down the sidestreets under the trees with a headache 
self-conscious looking at the full moon.  
  In my hungry fatigue, and shopping for images, I went into 
the neon fruit supermarket, dreaming of your enumerations!  
  What peaches and what penumbras!  Whole families shopping at 
night!  Aisles full of husbands!  Wives in the avocados, 
babies in the tomatoes!--and you, Garcia Lorca, what were you 
doing down by the watermelons?  
 
  I saw you, Walt Whitman, childless, lonely old grubber, 
poking among the meats in the refrigerator and eyeing the 
grocery boys.  
  I heard you asking questions of each:  Who killed the pork 
chops?  What price bananas?  Are you my Angel?  
  I wandered in and out of the brilliant stacks of cans 
following you, and followed in my imagination by the store 
detective.  
  We strode down the open corridors together in our solitary 
fancy tasting artichokes, possessing every frozen delicacy, 
and never passing the cashier.  
  Where are we going Walt Whitman?  The doors close in an 
hour.  Which way does the beard point tonight?  
  (I touch your book and dream of our odyssey in the 
supermarket and feel absurd.) 
  Will we walk all night through solitary streets?  The trees 
add shade to shade, lights out in the houses, we'll both be 
lonely.  
  Will we stroll dreaming of the lost America of love past 
blue automobiles in driveways, home to our silent cottage?  
  Ah, dear father, graybeard, lonely old courage-teacher, what 
America did you have when Charon quit poling his ferry and you 
got out on a smoking bank and stood watching the boat 
disappear on the black waters of Lethe?  

  America 
      by Allen Ginsburg 
 
America I've given you all and now I'm nothing.  
America two dollars and twenty-seven cents January 17, 1956.  
I can't stand my own mind.  
America when will we end the human war?  
Go fuck yourself with your atom bomb  
I don't feel good don't bother me.  
I won't write my poem till I'm in my right mind.  
America when will you be angelic?  
When will you take off your clothes?  
When will you look at yourself through the grave?  
When will you be worthy of your million Trotskyites?  
America why are your libraries full of tears?  
America when will you send your eggs to India?  
I'm sick of your insane demands.  
When can I go into the supermarket and buy what I need with my good looks?  
America after all it is you and I who are perfect not the next world.  
Your machinery is too much for me.  
You made me want to be a saint.  
There must be some other way to settle this argument.  
Burroughs is in Tangiers I don't think he'll come back it's sinister.  
Are you being sinister or is this some form of practical joke?  
I'm trying to come to the point.  
I refuse to give up my obsession.  
America stop pushing I know what I'm doing.  
America the plum blossoms are falling.  
I haven't read the newspapers for months, everyday somebody goes on trial for murder.  
America I feel sentimental about the Wobblies.  
America I used to be a communist when I was a kid and I'm not sorry.  
I smoke marijuana every chance I get.  
I sit in my house for days on end and stare at the roses in the closet.  
When I go to Chinatown I get drunk and never get laid.  
My mind is made up there's going to be trouble.  
You should have seen me reading Marx.  
My psychoanalyst thinks I'm perfectly right.  
I won't say the Lord's Prayer.  
I have mystical visions and cosmic vibrations.  
America I still haven't told you what you did to Uncle Max after he came over from 
Russia.  
 
I'm addressing you.  
Are you going to let our emotional life be run by Time Magazine?  
I'm obsessed by Time Magazine.  
I read it every week.  
Its cover stares at me every time I slink past the corner candystore.  
I read it in the basement of the Berkeley Public Library.  
It's always telling me about responsibility. Businessmen are serious. Movie  
producers are serious. Everybody's serious but me.  
It occurs to me that I am America.  
I am talking to myself again.  

 
Asia is rising against me.  
I haven't got a chinaman's chance.  
I'd better consider my national resources.  
My national resources consist of two joints of marijuana millions of genitals  
an unpublishable private literature that goes 1400 miles and hour and  
twentyfivethousand mental institutions.  
I say nothing about my prisons nor the millions of underpriviliged who live in  
my flowerpots under the light of five hundred suns.  
I have abolished the whorehouses of France, Tangiers is the next to go.  
My ambition is to be President despite the fact that I'm a Catholic.  
 
America how can I write a holy litany in your silly mood?  
I will continue like Henry Ford my strophes are as individual as his  
automobiles more so they're all different sexes  
America I will sell you strophes $2500 apiece $500 down on your old strophe  
America free Tom Mooney  
America save the Spanish Loyalists  
America Sacco & Vanzetti must not die  
America I am the Scottsboro boys.  
America when I was seven momma took me to Communist Cell meetings they  
sold us garbanzos a handful per ticket a ticket costs a nickel and the  
speeches were free everybody was angelic and sentimental about the  
workers it was all so sincere you have no idea what a good thing the party  
was in 1935 Scott Nearing was a grand old man a real mensch Mother  
Bloor made me cry I once saw Israel Amter plain. Everybody must have been a spy.  
America you don're really want to go to war.  
America it's them bad Russians.  
Them Russians them Russians and them Chinamen. And them Russians.  
The Russia wants to eat us alive. The Russia's power mad. She wants to take  
our cars from out our garages.  
Her wants to grab Chicago. Her needs a Red Reader's Digest. her wants our  
auto plants in Siberia. Him big bureaucracy running our fillingstations.  
That no good. Ugh. Him makes Indians learn read. Him need big black niggers.  
Hah. Her make us all work sixteen hours a day.  
Help.  
America this is quite serious.  
America this is the impression I get from looking in the television set.  
America is this correct?  
I'd better get right down to the job.  
It's true I don't want to join the Army or turn lathes in precision parts  
factories, I'm nearsighted and psychopathic anyway.  
America I'm putting my queer shoulder to the wheel.  

Frederick Douglass 
  by Robert Hayden 
 
When it is finally ours, this freedom, this liberty, this beautiful 
and terrible thing, needful to man as air, 
usable as earth; when it belongs at last to all, 
when it is truly instinct, brain matter, diastole, systole, 
reflex action; when it is finally won; when it is more 
than the gaudy mumbo jumbo of politicians: 
this man, this Douglass, this former slave, this Negro 
beaten to his knees, exiled, visioning a world 
where none is lonely, none hunted, alien, 
this man, superb in love and logic, this man 
shall be remembered. Oh, not with statues' rhetoric, 
not with legends and poems and wreaths of bronze alone, 
but with the lives grown out of his life, the lives 
fleshing his dream of the beautiful, needful thing. 

 
                        American History 
 
                           by Michael S. Harper 
 
 
 
                        Those four black girls blown up  
 
                        in that Alabama church 
 
                        remind me of five hundred 
 
                        middle passage blacks, 
 
                        in a net, under water 
 
                        in Charleston harbor 
 
                        so redcoats wouldn’t find them. 
 
                        Can’t find what you can’t see 
 
                        can you?  
 
 

 

Dear John, Dear Coltrane 
  by Michael S. Harper 
 
a love supreme, a love supreme 
a love supreme, a love supreme 
 
Sex fingers toes 
in the marketplace 
near your father's church 
in Hamlet, North Carolina-- 
witness to this love 
in this calm fallow 
of these minds; 
there is no substitute for pain: 
genitals gone or going, 
seed burned out, 
you tuck the roots in the earth, 
turn back, and move 
by river through the swamps, 
singing: a love supreme, a love supreme; 
what does it all mean? 
Loss, so great each black 
woman expects your failure 
in mute change, the seed gone. 
You plod up into the electric city-- 
your song now crystal and 
the blues. You pick up the horn 
with some will and blow 
into the freezing night: 
a love supreme, a love supreme-- 
 
Dawn comes and you cook 
up the thick sin 'tween 
impotence and death, fuel 
the tenor sax cannibal 
heart, genitals and sweat 
that makes you clean-- 
a love supreme, a love supreme--  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Why you so black? 
cause I am 
why you so funky? 
cause I am 
why you so black? 
cause I am 
why you sweet? 
cause I am 
why you so black? 
cause I am 
a love supreme, a love supreme: 
 
So sick you couldn't play Naima, 
so flat we ached 
for song you'd concealed 
with your own blood, 
your diseased liver gave 
out its purity, 
the inflated heart 
pumps out, the tenor kiss, 
tenor love: 
a love supreme, a love supreme-- 
a love supreme, a love supreme-- 

 
 
 

The Rock Cries Out to Us Today 
   by Maya Angelou 
 
A Rock, A River, A Tree 
Hosts to species long since departed, 
Mark the mastodon. 
The dinosaur, who left dry tokens 
Of their sojourn here 
On our planet floor, 
Any broad alarm of their of their hastening doom 
Is lost in the gloom of dust and ages. 
But today, the Rock cries out to us, clearly, forcefully, 
Come, you may stand upon my  
Back and face your distant destiny, 
But seek no haven in my shadow. 
I will give you no hiding place down here. 
You, created only a little lower than 
The angels, have crouched too long in 
The bruising darkness, 
Have lain too long 
Face down in ignorance. 
Your mouths spelling words 
Armed for slaughter. 
The rock cries out today, you may stand on me, 
But do not hide your face. 
Across the wall of the world, 
A river sings a beautiful song, 
Come rest here by my side. 
Each of you a bordered country, 
Delicate and strangely made proud, 
Yet thrusting perpetually under siege. 
Your armed struggles for profit 
Have left collars of waste upon 
My shore, currents of debris upon my breast. 
Yet, today I call you to my riverside, 
If you will study war no more. 
Come, clad in peace and I will sing the songs 
The Creator gave to me when I 
And the tree and stone were one. 
Before cynicism was a bloody sear across your brow 
And when you yet knew you still knew nothing. 
The river sings and sings on. 
There is a true yearning to respond to 
The singing river and the wise rock. 
So say the Asian, the Hispanic, the Jew, 
The African and Native American, the Sioux, 
The Catholic, the Muslim, the French, the Greek, 
The Irish, the Rabbi, the Priest, the Sheikh, 
The Gay, the Straight, the Preacher, 
The privileged, the homeless, the teacher. 
They hear. They all hear 
The speaking of the tree. 
Today, the first and last of every tree 
Speaks to humankind. Come to me, here beside the river. 
 

Plant yourself beside me, here beside the river. 
Each of you, descendant of some passed on 
Traveller, has been paid for. 
You, who gave me my first name, 
You Pawnee, Apache and Seneca, 
You Cherokee Nation, who rested with me, 
Then forced on bloody feet, 
Left me to the employment of other seekers-- 
Desperate for gain, starving for gold. 
You, the Turk, the Swede, the German, the Scot... 
You the Ashanti, the Yoruba, the Kru, 
Bought, sold, stolen, arriving on a nightmare 
Praying for a dream. 
Here, root yourselves beside me. 
I am the tree planted by the river, 
Which will not be moved. 
I, the rock, I the river, I the tree 
I am yours--your passages have been paid. 
Lift up your faces, you have a piercing need 
For this bright morning dawning for you. 
History, despite its wrenching pain, 
Cannot be unlived, and if faced with courage, 
Need not be lived again. 
Lift up your eyes upon 
The day breaking for you. 
Give birth again 
To the dream. 
Women, children, men, 
Take it into the palms of your hands. 
Mold it into the shape of your most 
Private need. Sculpt it into 
The image of your most public self. 
Lift up your hearts. 
Each new hour holds new chances 
For new beginnings. 
Do not be wedded forever 
To fear, yoked eternally 
To brutishness. 
The horizon leans forward, 
Offering you space to place new steps of change. 
Here, on the pulse of this fine day 
You may have the courage 
To look up and out upon me, 
The rock, the river, the tree, your country. 
No less to Midas than the mendicant. 
No less to you now than the mastodon then. 
Here on the pulse of this new day 
You may have the grace to look up and out 
And into your sister's eyes, 
Into your brother's face, your country 
And say simply 
Very simply 
With hope 
Good morning. 

 
“Listen to the mustn'ts” 
    by Shel Silverstein 
 
Listen to the MUSTN'TS child, 
Listen to the DON'TS 
Listen to the SHOULDN'TS 
The IMPOSSIBLES, the WON'TS 
Listen to the NEVER HAVES 
Then listen close to me - 
Anything can happen, child 
ANYTHING can be. 
 

 
 
 
 
“The Bridge”  
  by Shel Silverstein 
 
This bridge will only take you halfway there  
To those mysterious lands you long to see:  
Through gypsy camps and swirling Arab fairs  
And moonlit woods where unicorns run free.  
So come and walk awhile with me and share  
The twisting trails and wondrous worlds I've known.  
But this bridge will only take you halfway there-  
The last few steps you'll have to take alone.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The End (For Now) 
 

